BIEN 001 
Introductory Colloquium in Bioengineering 1

Colloquia on current topics in bioengineering and other related fields delivered at an introductory level. Presented by faculty members, visiting scientists, or individuals with industrial bioengineering experience. Graded Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC).

BIEN 010 
Overview of Bioengineering 4

Provides an overview of the various aspects of bioengineering and introduces bioengineering design. Illustrates the application of engineering principles for the design of various products to health science industries. Covers diagnostic instruments, artificial organs, biotechnology, and cell and tissue engineering. Covers engineering ethics.

BIEN 101 
Quantitative Biochemistry 4 
BIOL 005A, CHEM 008A, MATH 046
Provides Bioengineering students with an in-depth experience in applying mathematical modeling and simulation methods to understand the dynamics of biochemical systems. Prepares for designing new applications of genetic engineering.

BIEN 105 
Circulation Physiology 4 
BIEN 110
Introduces tensor and vector mathematics that describe the conservation of momentum and mass transport in biological sciences,the cardiovascular system, and pulmonary system. Includes constitutive equations, significance of fluid stress in biological vessels, and the physiological relevance of fundamental parameters. Emphasizes the relation between function and system behavior.

BIEN 110 
Biomechanics of the Human Body 4
CHEM 001, CS010, MATH 010A, PHYS 040B
Introduces the motion, structure, and function of the musculoskeletal system, the cardiovascular system, and the pulmonary system. Topics include applied statics, kinematics, and dynamics of these systems and the mechanics of various tissues (ligament, bone, heart, blood vessels, lung). Emphasizes the relation between function and material properties of these tissues.

BIEN 115 
Quantitative Physiology 4 
BIEN 110
Analyzes engineering aspects of physiological systems. Covers the nervous system, muscular system, respiratory system, renal system, and endocrine system based on fundamental principles of material transport across biological membrane.

BIEN 120 
Biosystems and Signal Analysis 4 
BIEN 105
Provides basic knowledge for the quantitative analysis of the dynamic behavior of biological systems. Particular applications include neural systems, control of metabolic and hormonal systems, and design of instruments for monitoring and controlling biological systems. Topics include system theory, signal properties, control theory, and transfer functions.

BIEN 125
Biotechnology and Molecular Bioengineering 4
BIEN 101
Provides an overview of biochemical processes in cells and their use in developing new products and processes. Presents cellular processes such as metabolism, protein synthesis, enzyme behavior, and cell signaling and control from an engineering viewpoint of modeling and control.

BIEN 130
Bioinstrumentation 4 
EE 001A
Introduces basic components of instruments for biological applications. Explores sources of signals and physical principles governing the design and operation of instrumentation systems used in medicine and physiological research. Topics include data acquisition and characterization; signal-to-noise concepts and safety analysis; and interaction of instrument and environment.

BIEN 130L
Bioinstrumentation Laboratory 2 
EE 001A
Laboratory experience with instrumental methods of measuring biological systems. Introduces various sensors and transducers to measure physical, chemical, and biological properties. Covers reliability, dynamic behavior, and data analysis.

BIEN 135 
Biophysics and Biothermodynamics 4 
BIEN 101, MATH 10B, MATH 046, PHYS 040C
An introduction to the application of thermodynamic principles to understanding the behavior of biological systems. Discusses biophysical properties of biomacromolecules such as proteins, polynucleotides, carbohydrates, and lipids, as well as the methods of characterizing their properties and interactions.

BIEN 136
Tissue Engineering 4 
BIOL 005A, CHEM 001C
Covers progress in cellular and molecular biology and engineering. Provides the basis for advancing tissue repair and regeneration with the goal of restoring compromised tissue functions. Presents methods for cell culture, tissue design and development, manipulation of the cell/ tissue microenvironment, and current strategies for functional reconstruction of injured tissues.

BIEN 137 
Advanced Biomechanics 4 
BIEN 110, BIOL 005B, MATH 046, PHYS 040A
Focuses on mechanical characterization of biological tissues at the cellular, organ, and system level. Explores biomechanical factors of physiological and pathological conditions.

BIEN 138 
Fundamental Principles of Wound Repair 4 
BIEN 105, BIOL 002, BIOL 005A
Provides fundamental understanding of the molecular and cellular biology of wound repair and regeneration. Focuses on the spatiotemporal roles of inflammatory cytokines; growth factors; extracellular matrix; mechanical forces; tissue cells and adult stem/progenitor cells in soft tissue repair. Topics include embryonic wound regeneration and adult skin and cardiovascular repair.

BIEN 140A 
Biomaterials 4 
BIEN 101, MATH 010B, PHYS 040B
Covers the principles of materials science and engineering with attention given to topics in bioengineering. Explores atomic structures, hard treatment, fundamentals of corrosion, manufacturing processes, and characterization of materials.

BIEN 140B 
Biomaterials 4 
PHYS 040B
Covers the structure-property relations of metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites, as well as hard and soft tissues such as bone, teeth, cartilage, ligament, skin, muscle, and vasculature. Focuses on behavior of materials in the physiological environment.

BIEN 142 
Introductory Biomedical Optical Imaging 4 
PHYS 040C, MATH 010B
Examines fundamental theory and basic design of biomedical optical imaging systems. Topics include a basic understanding of the working principles of optical components, diagnostic light-tissue interaction, and design of imaging systems to exploit the interaction of light with biological phenomena.

BIEN 159 
Dynamics of Biological Systems 4 
BIOL 005B, MATH 046
Covers engineering principles for the analysis and modeling of biological phenomena. Topics include molecular diffusion and transport, membranes, ligandbioreceptor interactions, enzyme kinetics, and dynamics of metabolic pathways. Examines the application of these principles to the design of bioreactors, bioassays, drug delivery systems, and artificial organs. 

BIEN 160 
Biomedical Imaging 4 
BIEN 120
An introduction to the fundamental physics and engineering principles for medical imaging systems. Covers X-ray, ultrasound, radionuclide, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, optical coherent tomography, and other optical methods. Includes image formation and reconstruction, image characteristics, and quality and image processing.

BIEN 165 
Biomolecular Engineering 4 
BIEN 135 
Emphasizes engineering, biochemical, and biophysical concepts and technologies intrinsic to specific topics of biomolecular engineering. Introduces the history of genetic and protein engineering. Topics include biological thermodynamics, molecular kinetics, biochemical and biophysical approaches, protein engineering, high-throughput screening technologies, and protein engineering with unnatural amino acids.

BIEN 166 
Bioinspired Engineering For Sustainable Energy 4 
BIEN 140A
Introduces the use of concepts from basic biological sciences (including biochemistry and biophysics) for applied energy engineering. Covers biological energy conversion (including photosynthesis) and its implication for sustainable energy technologies. Discusses recent advances in biomimetic and bioinspired energy conversion.

BIEN 167
Medical Diagnostics 4 
BIEN 130
Provides an overview of medical diagnostics. Topics include methods of biochemical detection, genotyping, DNA sequencing, medical imaging, hematology, microfluidics, epidemiology, diagnostics for point-of-care and resource-limited settings, and case studies of commercially successful diagnostic products.

BIEN 175A
Senior Design 2 
BIEN 010, BIEN 130L
Covers the entire design process for bioengineering. Explores intellectual property, quality control, and regulatory and ethical considerations. Requires working in small teams effectively to prepare formal engineering reports, web pages notebooks, oral presentations, a project demonstration, and a business plan. Graded In Progress (IP) until BIEN 175A, BIEN 175B, and BIEN 175C are completed, at which time a final letter grade is assigned.

BIEN 175B 
Senior Design 4 
BIEN 175A
Covers the entire design process for bioengineering. Explores intellectual property, quality control, and regulatory and ethical considerations. Requires working in small teams effectively to prepare formal engineering reports, web pages, notebooks, oral presentation, a project demonstration, and a business plan. Graded In Progress (IP) until BIEN 175A, BIEN 175B, and BIEN 175C are completed, at which time a final, letter grade is assigned.

BIEN 175C 
Senior Design 4 
BIEN 175B
Covers the entire design process for bioengineering. Explores intellectual property, quality control, and regulatory and ethical considerations. Requires working in small teams effectively to prepare formal engineering reports, web pages, notebooks, oral presentations, a project demonstration, and a business plan.

BIEN 190 
Special Studies 1 to 5 

Provides individual study to meet special curricular needs. Course is repeatable to a maximum of 9 units.

BIEN 197 
Research For Undergraduates 1 to 4 

Directed research on a topic relevant to bioengineering. Requires a final written report. Graded Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC). Course is repeatable.
