CEE 010 Introduction to Chemical and
Environmental Engineering 1 Lecture, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): none. An introduction to chemical
and environmental engineering for engineering
and nonengineering majors. Aims to enrich
an appreciation of chemical, biochemical, and
environmental engineering. Discusses typical
careers, key applications, latest developments
and the need to engage in lifelong learning in the
field. Graded Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC).
CEE 011 Introduction to
Bioengineering 2 Lecture, 1 hour; laboratory,
3 hours. An introduction to bioengineering
for engineering and nonengineering majors.
Discusses the application of concepts
and methods of the physical sciences and
mathematics to problems in the life sciences.
Covers typical careers, key applications, latest
developments in the field, and the need to
engage in lifelong learning. Provides hands-on
experiences and includes a field trip. Graded
Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC).
CEE 125 Analytical Methods For Chemical
and Environmental Engineers 4 Lecture, 2
hours; laboratory, 6 hours. Prerequisite(s): CEE
010 (CEE 010 may be taken concurrently);
CHEM 001C and CHEM 01LC; CHEM
008A and CHEM 08LA or CHEM 08HA and
CHEM 08HLA; PHYS 040C or PHYS 040HC.
Examines chromatographic separations,
mass spectrometry, atomic absorption, and
electrophoresis. Presents total carbon analysis
as an introduction to analytical methods and
their use in the chemical and environmental
engineering fields.
CEE 132 Green Engineering 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
CHE 110A or ENVE 171, senior standing
or consent of instructor. An introduction
to the design, commercialization, and use
of feasible and economical processes and
products that minimize risks to human health
and the environment. Topics covered include
environmental risk assessment; regulations;
chemical process flow-sheet analysis for
pollution prevention; product life-cycle
assessment; and industrial ecology. Credit is
awarded for only one of CEE 132 or CEE 232.
CEE 135 Chemistry of Materials 4 Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
CHEM 008A and CHEM 08LA or CHEM 08HA
and CHEM 08HLA; PHYS 040C or PHYS
040HC. An introduction to the synthesis,
structure, properties, and performance of
modern materials. Topics include the science
of materials, bonding and structure, the
strength of materials, electrons in materials,
semiconductors, superconductors, and optical
properties of materials.
CEE 136 Aerosol Technology 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
concurrent enrollment in CHE 120. Explores
the physical and chemical properties of aerosol
and its relationship to ambient air quality, control
technology, health impacts, and global climate
change. Introduces the principles of aerosol
measurement and aerosol measurement
technology.
CEE 140A Biomaterials 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): BIEN 101 or
BCH 100, MATH 010B, PHYS 040B or PHYS
040HB; or consent of instructor. Covers the
principles of materials science and engineering,
with attention to topics in bioengineering.
Explores atomic structures, hard treatment,
fundamentals of corrosion, manufacturing
processes, and characterization of materials.
Cross-listed with BIEN140A.
CEE 140B Biomaterials 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): PHYS 040B
or PHYS 040HB; Covers the structure-property
relations of metals, ceramics, polymers, and
composites, as well as hard and soft tissues
such as bone, teeth, cartilage, ligament, skin,
muscle, and vasculature. Focuses on behavior
of materials in the physiological environment.
Cross-listed with BIEN140B.
CEE 158 Professional Development For
Engineers 3 Lecture, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
upper-division standing. A review of various
topics relevant to the professional development
of chemical engineers. Includes career paths;
interview strategies; professional registration and
preparation for certification examinations; ethics;
risk management and environmental health and
safety; regulatory issues; and lifelong learning.
CEE 159 Dynamics of Biological
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): BIOL 005B, MATH 046;
or consent of instructor. Covers engineering
principles for the analysis and modeling of
biological phenomena. Topics include molecular
diffusion and transport, membranes, ligandbioreceptor interactions, enzyme kinetics, and
dynamics of metabolic pathways. Examines the
application of these principles to the design of
bioreactors, bioassays, drug delivery systems,
and artificial organs. Cross-listed with BIEN 159.
CEE 197 Research For Undergraduates 1
to 4 Research, 3 to 12 hours. Prerequisite(s):
consent of instructor and Chemical and
Environmental Engineering undergraduate
program advisor. Directed research on a 
| 178
topic relevant to chemical and environmental
engineering. Requires a final written report.
Course is repeatable to a maximum of 8 units.