CEE 010 Introduction to Chemical and
Environmental Engineering 1 Lecture, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): none. An introduction to chemical
and environmental engineering for engineering
and nonengineering majors. Aims to enrich
an appreciation of chemical, biochemical, and
environmental engineering. Discusses typical
careers, key applications, latest developments
and the need to engage in lifelong learning in the
field. Graded Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC).
CEE 011 Introduction to
Bioengineering 2 Lecture, 1 hour; laboratory,
3 hours. An introduction to bioengineering
for engineering and nonengineering majors.
Discusses the application of concepts
and methods of the physical sciences and
mathematics to problems in the life sciences.
Covers typical careers, key applications, latest
developments in the field, and the need to
engage in lifelong learning. Provides hands-on
experiences and includes a field trip. Graded
Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC).
CEE 125 Analytical Methods For Chemical
and Environmental Engineers 4 Lecture, 2
hours; laboratory, 6 hours. Prerequisite(s): CEE
010 (CEE 010 may be taken concurrently);
CHEM 001C and CHEM 01LC; CHEM
008A and CHEM 08LA or CHEM 08HA and
CHEM 08HLA; PHYS 040C or PHYS 040HC.
Examines chromatographic separations,
mass spectrometry, atomic absorption, and
electrophoresis. Presents total carbon analysis
as an introduction to analytical methods and
their use in the chemical and environmental
engineering fields.
CEE 132 Green Engineering 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
CHE 110A or ENVE 171, senior standing
or consent of instructor. An introduction
to the design, commercialization, and use
of feasible and economical processes and
products that minimize risks to human health
and the environment. Topics covered include
environmental risk assessment; regulations;
chemical process flow-sheet analysis for
pollution prevention; product life-cycle
assessment; and industrial ecology. Credit is
awarded for only one of CEE 132 or CEE 232.
CEE 135 Chemistry of Materials 4 Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
CHEM 008A and CHEM 08LA or CHEM 08HA
and CHEM 08HLA; PHYS 040C or PHYS
040HC. An introduction to the synthesis,
structure, properties, and performance of
modern materials. Topics include the science
of materials, bonding and structure, the
strength of materials, electrons in materials,
semiconductors, superconductors, and optical
properties of materials.
CEE 136 Aerosol Technology 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
concurrent enrollment in CHE 120. Explores
the physical and chemical properties of aerosol
and its relationship to ambient air quality, control
technology, health impacts, and global climate
change. Introduces the principles of aerosol
measurement and aerosol measurement
technology.
CEE 140A Biomaterials 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): BIEN 101 or
BCH 100, MATH 010B, PHYS 040B or PHYS
040HB; or consent of instructor. Covers the
principles of materials science and engineering,
with attention to topics in bioengineering.
Explores atomic structures, hard treatment,
fundamentals of corrosion, manufacturing
processes, and characterization of materials.
Cross-listed with BIEN140A.
CEE 140B Biomaterials 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): PHYS 040B
or PHYS 040HB; Covers the structure-property
relations of metals, ceramics, polymers, and
composites, as well as hard and soft tissues
such as bone, teeth, cartilage, ligament, skin,
muscle, and vasculature. Focuses on behavior
of materials in the physiological environment.
Cross-listed with BIEN140B.
CEE 158 Professional Development For
Engineers 3 Lecture, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
upper-division standing. A review of various
topics relevant to the professional development
of chemical engineers. Includes career paths;
interview strategies; professional registration and
preparation for certification examinations; ethics;
risk management and environmental health and
safety; regulatory issues; and lifelong learning.
CEE 159 Dynamics of Biological
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): BIOL 005B, MATH 046;
or consent of instructor. Covers engineering
principles for the analysis and modeling of
biological phenomena. Topics include molecular
diffusion and transport, membranes, ligandbioreceptor interactions, enzyme kinetics, and
dynamics of metabolic pathways. Examines the
application of these principles to the design of
bioreactors, bioassays, drug delivery systems,
and artificial organs. Cross-listed with BIEN 159.
CEE 197 Research For Undergraduates 1
to 4 Research, 3 to 12 hours. Prerequisite(s):
consent of instructor and Chemical and
Environmental Engineering undergraduate
program advisor. Directed research on a 
| 178
topic relevant to chemical and environmental
engineering. Requires a final written report.
Course is repeatable to a maximum of 8 units.
CHE 100 Engineering
Thermodynamics 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): CHEM 001C,
MATH 046 (or concurrent enrollment), PHYS
040B or PHYS 040HB; or consent of instructor.
An introduction to engineering thermodynamics
with emphasis on chemical and environmental
engineering systems. Topics include concepts
of equilibrium, temperature, and reversibility; the
first law and concept of energy; and the second
law and concept of entropy. Also examines
equations of state, thermodynamic properties,
and engineering applications used in the analysis
and design of closed and open systems. Credit
is awarded for only one of CHE 100 or ME 100A.
CHE 102 Catalytic Reaction
Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion,
1 hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 122 or consent of
instructor. Principles of surface reactions and
heterogeneous catalysis. Catalyzed reaction
kinetics, heterogeneous reactions, diffusion and
heterogeneous catalysis, analysis and design of
heterogeneous reactors.
CHE 105 Introduction to Nanoscale
Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): CEE 135, MATH 010A,
PHYS 040C or PHYS 040HC; or consent of
instructor. An introduction to nanotechnology
engineering and its various applications.
Includes electromagnetic waves and quantum
mechanics; synthesis of nanostructures;
assembly of nanostructures; and traditional
and nontraditional methods of nanolithography
and interactions between electronic and optical
properties. Also covers organic heterostructures,
nanotubes, and quantum computing.
CHE 110A Chemical Process
Analysis 3 Lecture, 2 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 001C, MATH 009C, PHYS
040B or PHYS 040HB; or consent of instructor.
Introduces the principles of conservation of
mass in chemical process systems. Topics
include the development of steady-state mass
balances, and application of mass balances to
existing industrial processes.
CHE 110B Chemical Process
Analysis 3 Lecture, 2 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 110A with a grade
of “C-” or better; or consent of instructor.
Applies principles of conservation of energy to
chemical process systems. Topics include the
development of steady-state and unsteady-state
energy balances as well as combined mass and
energy balances in industrial processes.
CHE 114 Applied Fluid Mechanics 4 Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
CHE 110A or ENVE 171, MATH 010A, MATH
046, PHYS 040B or PHYS 040HB; or consent
of instructor. An introduction to fluid statics,
fluid flow, and flow of compressible and
incompressible fluids in conduits and openchannel flow. Also covers flow past immersed
bodies, transportation and metering of fluids,
and agitation and mixing of liquids. Credit is
awarded for only one of CHE 114 or ME 113.
CHE 116 Heat Transfer 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 100,
CHE 114 with a grade of “C-” or better; or
consent of instructor. An analysis of heat transfer
for Chemical Engineering and Environmental
Engineering majors. Topics include steadyand unsteady-state heat conduction, forced
convection, basic radiation heat transfer, and
design of heat exchangers. Credit is awarded for
only one of CHE 116 or ME 116A.
CHE 117 Separation Processes 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE
116, CHE 120; or consent of instructor. Covers
fundamental concepts and practical techniques
for designing equipment based on equilibrium
stage processes. Explores gas-liquid absorption,
distillation, liquid-liquid extraction, solid-liquid
extraction, humidification, drying, and membrane
processes.
CHE 118 Process Dynamics and
Control 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): CHE 117, CHE 122, ENGR
118; or consent of instructor. Fundamentals of
process control. Feedback and feedforward
control of dynamic processes. Frequency
response analysis. Introduction to multivariable
control.
CHE 120 Mass Transfer 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 114 with
a grade of “C-” or better, MATH 046; or consent
of instructor. Introduction to analysis of mass
transfer in systems of interest to chemical and
environmental engineering practice. Explores
transport of matter by diffusion, free, and forced
convection.
CHE 122 Chemical Engineering
Kinetics 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 100, CHE 110B,
CHE 120 (may be taken concurrently), ENGR
118; or consent of instructor. Introduction to
homogeneous and heterogeneous kinetics and
reactor design for chemical and biochemical
processes.
CHE 124 Biochemical Engineering
Principles 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): BCH 110HA or BCH 110A;
CHE 120, CHE 122. Examines the principles of
biochemical engineering. Topics include kinetics
of enzymatic reactions and microbial growth,
batch and continuous culture reactors, product
formulation, and nutrient utilization. Also studies
oxygen transfer, bioreactor scale-up, air and
media sterilization, fundamentals of bioreactor
design, and bioseparations.
CHE 124L Biochemical Engineering
Laboratory 2 Laboratory, 6 hours.
Prerequisite(s): CHE 124 or consent of instructor.
Laboratory practices in biochemical engineering.
Determination of microbial kinetics and
biologically mediated reactions, oxygen transfer
coefficients. Batch and continuous culturing, air
and media sterilization, bioseparations.
CHE 130 Advanced Engineering
Thermodynamics 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 100
or consent of instructor. Advanced study
of chemical thermodynamics and their
applications to chemical and environmental
engineering processes. Applies principles for
the thermodynamic behavior of pure solutions
and mixtures, phases, and chemical equilibria
for homogeneous and heterogeneous systems
to a variety of processes common to chemical
and environmental engineering. Cross-listed with
ENVE 130.
CHE 131 Electrochemical
Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 100, CHE 120, CHE
122; or consent of instructor. Explores role of
thermodynamics, charge transfer kinetics, and
mass transfer on behavior of electrochemical
systems. Includes cell thermodynamics,
faradaic and non-faradaic rate processes, ionic
transport, nucleation and growth theories.
Shows applications to chemical sensors,
batteries, corrosion, and thin film deposition.
Provides in-class demonstrations to illustrate
concepts.
CHE 136 Advanced Topics in Heat
Transfer 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): CHE 116, CHE 120. Advanced
study of the computational and theoretical
methods associated with heat transfer, fluid flow,
and other related processes. Topics include
phenomena of heat conduction, convection, and
the calculation of flow fields.
CHE 140 Cell Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): CHE 124
or consent of instructor. Introduction to genetic
and environmental manipulation of cells for
production of proteins and for enhanced
biocatalytic and synthetic activities. Cloning
and gene expression in different host systems,
posttranslational processing, metabolic controls
and kinetics, in vivo NMR spectroscopy, cell
modeling, and sensitivity analysis. Credit is
awarded for only one of CEE 210 or CHE 140.
CHE 150 Biosensors 4 Lecture, 2 hours;
laboratory, 6 hours. Prerequisite(s): BCH 184 or
CHE 124 or consent of instructor. Introduces the
fundamentals and applications of biosensors.
Topics on enzyme-, whole cell-, tissue-, and
antibody/antigen-based electrochemical, optical,
and piezoelectric biosensors for applications
in bioprocess monitoring and control,
environmental monitoring, and health care are
covered.
CHE 160A Chemical and Environmental
Engineering Laboratory 3 laboratory, 6 hours;
written work, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): CHE
114, CHE 120. Involves laboratory exercises
in chemical and environmental engineering.
Experiments cover physical measurements,
fluid mechanics, and mass transfer. Emphasizes
experimental design, analysis of results, and
preparation of engineering reports. Cross-listed
with ENVE 160A.
CHE 160B Chemical Engineering
Laboratory 3 Laboratory, 6 hours; written
work, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): CHE 116,
CHE 122. Consists of laboratory exercises in
chemical engineering. Includes experiments in
physical measurements, heat transfer, reactor
analysis, and chemical kinetics. Emphasis is on 
179 |
experimental design, analysis of results, and
preparation of engineering reports.
CHE 160C Chemical Engineering
Laboratory 3 Laboratory, 6 hours; written
work, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): CHE 117, CHE
118 (CHE 117 and CHE 118 may be taken
concurrently), CHE 122. Consists of laboratory
exercises in chemical engineering. Includes
experiments and simulations in separation
processes and in process control. Emphasis is
on experimental design, analysis of results, and
preparation of engineering reports.
CHE 161 Nanotechnology Processing
Laboratory 3 Laboratory, 6 hours; written
work, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): CHE 100
or consent of instructor. An introduction to
growth and characterization techniques that
involve nanomaterials and devices. Includes
preparing thin films; synthesizing Au and CdS
nanoparticles; synthesizing carbon nanotubes;
synthesizing alumina nanotemplate; synthesizing
gold and nickel nanowires; and assembling of
nanowires. Also includes imaging samples with
optical, scanning electron microscope, scanning
tunneling microscope, and atomic force
microscope.
CHE 171 Pollution Control For Chemical
Engineers 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): CHE 117 or consent of
instructor. Principles of industrial pollution control
in chemical engineering plants. Regulations,
criteria, measurements, and pollution control
systems associated with air, wastewater, and
solid waste management.
CHE 175A Chemical Process Design 4 Lecture,
1 hour; laboratory, 6 hours; consultation, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): CHE 117, CHE 122, MATH
010B, senior standing in Chemical Engineering;
CHE 118 (may be taken concurrently).
Introduction to chemical process plant design
procedures through economic analysis and
actual design of chemical processes. Addresses
practical applications to current chemical
and biochemical processes and economic
constraints. Concentrates on general design
considerations and economic principles. Graded
In Progress (IP) until CHE 175A and CHE 175B
are completed, at which time a final, letter grade
is assigned.
CHE 175B Chemical Process Design 4 Lecture,
1 hour; laboratory, 6 hours; consultation, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): CHE 175A; senior standing in
Chemical Engineering. Introduction to chemical
process plant design procedures through
economic analysis and actual design of chemical
processes. Topics address practical applications
to current chemical and biochemical processes
and economic constraints. Students complete
a detailed analysis and process design of the
projects begun in CHE 175A. A final report and
oral presentation are required. Satisfactory (S) or
No Credit (NC) grading is not available.
CHE 190 Special Studies 1 to 5 Individual
Study, 3 to 15 hours. Prerequisite(s): upperdivision standing; consent of instructor and
department chair. Individual study to meet
special curricular needs. Course is repeatable to
a maximum of 9 units.
