EE 001A Engineering Circuit Analysis
I 3 Lecture, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): MATH
046, PHYS 040C or PHYS 040HC (MATH 046,
PHYS 040C or PHYS 040HC may be taken
concurrently); concurrent enrollment in EE 01LA.
Ohm’s law and Kirchoff’s laws; nodal and loop
analysis; analysis of linear circuits; network
theorems; transients in RLC circuits. Application
of SPICE to circuit analysis.
EE 01LA Engineering Circuit Analysis I
Laboratory 1 Laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
EE 001A (may be taken concurrently) Laboratory
experiments closely tied to the lecture material
of EE 001A: resistive circuits, attenuation
and amplification, network theorems and
superposition, operational amplifiers, transient
response, application of SPICE to circuit
analysis.
EE 001B Engineering Circuit Analysis
II 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Prerequisite(s): EE 001A and EE 01LA.
Sinusoidal steady state analysis, polyphase
circuits, magnetically coupled networks,
frequency characteristics, Laplace and Fourier
transforms, Laplace and Fourier analysis.
Application of SPICE to complicated circuit
analysis.
EE 003 Electronics, Smartphones and Mobile
Internet 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): none Introduces basic concepts
and understanding of electronic products,
wireless communications, industrial control,
and robotics that are important for citizens
and leaders in the information age. Highlights
examples including smartphones, mobile
Internet, robots etc. as examples. Does not
confer credit towards a degree in the Bourns
College of Engineering.
EE 004 Nanotechnology: Science, Applications
and Future 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Introduces concepts and understanding
of nanotechnologies in electronics, energy,
medicine, and environment that are important
for citizens and leaders in the technology
economy. Discusses applications in cancer
treatments, cosmetics, nanorobots, solar energy,
and environmental protection. Does not confer
credit towards a degree in the Bourns College of
Engineering.
EE 005 Circuits and Electronics 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): PHYS
040C or PHYS 040HC. Introduces linear circuits
analysis, semiconductor diodes and transistors,
analog amplifier circuits, operational amplifiers,
and digital circuits. Does not confer credit
towards a degree in Electrical Engineering and in
Computer Engineering.
EE 010 Introduction to Electrical
Engineering 1 Lecture, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
none. Introduces electrical engineering
applications, career options, and the electrical
engineering curriculum. Provides motivation
and context for the mathematics and science
courses that are prerequisites to most electrical
engineering courses. Discusses contemporary
engineering issues, social and environmental
impact of engineering solutions, professional
ethics, and need for life-long learning.
EE 020 Linear Methods For Engineering
Analysis and Design Using Matlab 4 Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
CS 010; MATH 008B or MATH 009A or MATH
09HA. Introduces MATLAB programming and
linear methods for engineering analysis and
design. Topics include formulating engineering
problems as linear systems of equations;
methods for finding their solutions; vector and
matrix representations of signals and systems;
matrices computations; and linear programming
for system analysis and design.
Upper-Division Courses
EE 100A Electronic Circuits 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 001B.
Electronic systems, linear circuits, operational
amplifiers, diodes, nonlinear circuit applications,
junction and metal-oxide-semiconductor fieldeffect transistors, bipolar junction transistors,
MOS and bipolar digital circuits. Laboratory
experiments are performed in the subject areas
and SPICE simulation is used.
EE 100B Electronic Circuits 4 Lecture, 3
hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE
100A. Differential and multistage amplifiers,
output stages and power amplifiers, frequency
response, feedback, analog integrated circuits,
filters, tuned amplifiers, and oscillators.
Laboratory experiments are performed in the
subject areas and SPICE simulation is used.
EE 105 Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 001A, EE 020, MATH
046. Introduces the mathematical modeling 
| 294
of dynamical systems and their methods
of solution. Explores advanced techniques
and concepts for analytical modeling and
study of various electrical, electronic, and
electromechanical systems based upon physical
laws. Emphasizes formulation of problems via
differential equations. Addresses numerical
methods for integration and matrix analysis
problems.
EE 110A Signals and Systems 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE
001B (may be taken concurrently); EE 020;
MATH 046. Covers basic signals and types of
systems, linear time-invariant (LTI) systems,
Fourier analysis, frequency response, and
Laplace transforms for LTI systems. Includes
laboratory experiments with signals, transforms,
harmonic generation, linear digital filtering, and
sampling/aliasing.
EE 110B Signals and Systems 4 Lecture, 3
hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE
110A. Fourier analysis for discrete-time signals
and systems, filtering, modulation, sampling
and interpolation, z-transforms. Laboratory
experiments with signals, transforms, harmonic
generation, linear digital filtering, and sampling/
aliasing.
EE 111 Digital and Analog Signals and
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Prerequisite(s): EE 001B, EE 020, MATH 046;
or consent of instructor. Covers continuousand discrete-time signals and systems; linear
time-invariant (LTI) systems; impulse response;
Fourier analysis; frequency response; Laplace
and Z-transforms; and sampling theorem and
Nyquist rates. Includes laboratory experiments
with signals, transforms, linear digital filtering,
and sampling/aliasing.
EE 114 Probability, Random Variables,
and Random Processes in Electrical
Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion,
1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE 110A or EE 111.
Covers fundamentals of probability theory,
random variables, and random processes
with applications to electrical and computer
engineering. Includes probability theory,
random variables, densities, functions of
random variables, expectations and moments,
and multivariate distributions. Also addresses
random processes, autocorrelation function,
spectral analysis of random signals, and linear
systems with random inputs.
EE 115 Introduction to Communication
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Prerequisite(s): EE 110B. Covers spectral density
and correlation, modulation theory, amplitude,
frequency, phase and analog pulse modulation
and demodulation techniques, signal-to-noise
ratios, and system performance calculations.
Laboratory experiments involve techniques of
modulation and demodulation.
EE 116 Engineering Electromagnetics 4 Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE
001B (may be taken concurrently).Transmission
lines, fields and field operators, electrostatic
and magnetostatic fields, time-varying fields,
electrodynamics, electromagnetic waves, plane
waves, guided waves, and applications to
engineering problems.
EE 117 Electromagnetics II 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
EE 116. Covers applications of Maxwell’s
equations. Includes skin effect, boundaryvalue problems, plane waves in lossy media,
transverse EM waves, hollow metal waveguides,
cavity resonators, microstrips, propagation
in dielectrics and optical fibers, optical fibers
applications, radiation, and antennas. Covers
theoretical and computer modeling exercises in
basic electromagnetic technology.
EE 118 Radio Frequency Circuit
Design 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Prerequisite(s): EE 116, EE 100B (EE 116 and
EE 100B may be taken concurrently). Studies
design and analysis of radio frequency (RF)
circuits. Topics include multiport networks,
scattering matrix and S-parameters;
transmission lines, matching networks;
Smith Chart; RF electromagnetic analysis of
waveguides, antennas, filters and couplers;
RF transistor equivalent modeling, low-noise
amplifier design, noise figure, oscillators and
mixers, and phase lock loop.
EE 120A Logic Design 5 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours; individual study, 3 hours.
Prerequisite(s): CS 061 with a grade of “C-” or
better. Covers design of digital systems. Includes
Boolean algebra; combinational and sequential
logic design; design and use of arithmetic logic
units, carry-lookahead adders, multiplexors,
decoders, comparators, multipliers, flip-flops,
registers, and simple memories; state-machine
design; and basic register-transfer level design.
Uses hardware description languages, synthesis
tools, programmable logic, and significant
hardware prototyping. Cross-listed with CS
120A.
EE 120B Introduction to Embedded
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 120A or CS 120A.
Introduction to hardware and software design
of digital computing systems embedded in
electronic devices (e.g., digital cameras or
portable video games). Includes embedded
processor programming, custom processor
design, standard peripherals, memories,
interfacing, and hardware/software trade-offs.
Involves use of synthesis tools, programmable
logic, microcontrollers, and developing working
embedded systems. Cross-listed with CS
120B.
EE 123 Power Electronics 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):EE 100B
with a grade of “D-” or better. EE 123 online
section: enrollment in the Online Master-inScience in Engineering. Covers the study
of power semiconductor devices. Includes
magnetic circuits and components; switch
mode converters and power supplies; and
single, three-phase, pulse width modulation, and
resonant pulse inverters. Addresses voltage
controllers; direct current and induction motor
drives; and design of motion control drive
circuits for robotic and industrial automation
systems.
EE 128 Data Acquisition, Instrumentation, and
Process Control 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory,
3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 100B, EE 120B/CS
120B (EE 100B and EE 120B/CS 120B may
be taken concurrently); or consent of instructor.
Covers analog signal transducers, conditioning,
and processing; step motors, DC servo motors,
and other actuation devices. Explores analog
to digital and digital to analog converters; data
acquisition systems; microcomputer interfaces
to commonly used sensors and actuators; and
design principles for electronic instruments, real
time process control, and instrumentation.
EE 132 Automatic Control 4 Lecture, 3
hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
EE 105 or ME 103 or equivalent; EE 110A or
ENGR 118; or consent of instructor. Covers
mathematical modeling of linear systems
for time and frequency domain analysis.
Topics include transfer function and state
variable representations for analyzing stability,
controllability, and observability; and closed-loop
control design techniques by Bode, Nyquist, and
root-locus methods. Laboratories involve both
simulation and hardware exercises.
EE 133 Solid-State Electronics 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE
100A. Presents the fundamentals of solid-state
electronics. Topics include electronic band
structure, Fermi and quasi-Fermi levels; doping;
contacts; junctions; field-effect, bipolar, and
metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) transistors;
and charge-coupled devices. Also reviews
device fabrication concepts.
EE 135 Analog Integrated Circuit Layout
and Design 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 100B or consent of
instructor. Covers analog circuit design, layout,
and verification of complementary metal oxide
semiconductors (CMOSs) with use of computeraided design tools. Topics covered include
analog metal oxide semiconductor field effect
transistor (MOSFET) models, current sources,
references, amplified design, nonlinear analog
circuits, dynamic analog circuits, analog-todigital converters (ADCs), and digital-to-analog
converters (DACs).
EE 136 Semiconductor Device
Processing 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 133 or equivalent.
Presents device simulations and hands-on
experience in integrated-circuit fabrication
techniques and device characterization. Using
four-mask metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS)
technology, students fabricate resistors,
junctions, capacitors, and MOS transistors and
perform electrical evaluation.
EE 137 Introduction to Semiconductor
Optoelectronic Devices 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE 133. An
introduction to semiconductor optoelectronic
devices for optoelectronic communications and
signal processing. Topics include basic optical
processes in semiconductors, semiconductor
light-emitting diode, semiconductor
heterojunction lasers, photodetectors, solar
cells, optoelectronic modulation, and switching
devices.
EE 138 Electrical Properties of
Materials 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): upper-division standing; PHYS
040C or equivalent. Introduces the electrical
properties of materials. Includes the electron
as a particle and a wave; hydrogen atom and
the periodic table; chemical bonds; freeelectron theory of metals; band theory of solids; 
| 295
semiconductors and dielectrics; measurements
of material properties; and growth and
preparation of semiconductors.
EE 139 Magnetic Materials 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): upper-division
standing; PHYS 040C or equivalent. Introduces
fundamentals of magnetic materials for the
next-generation magnetic, nanomagnetic, and
spintronics-related technologies. Includes
basics of magnetism, models of the equivalent
magnetic charge and current, paramagnetic and
diamagnetic materials, soft and hard magnetic
materials, equivalent magnetic circuits, and
magnetic system design foundations.
EE 141 Digital Signal Processing 4 Lecture,
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
EE 110B. Transform analysis of Linear TimeInvariant (LTI) systems, discrete Fourier
Transform (DFT) and its computation, Fourier
analysis of signals using the DFT, filter design
techniques, structures for discrete-time systems.
Laboratory experiments on DFT, fast Fourier
transforms (FFT), infinite impulse response (IIR),
and finite impulse response (FIR) filter design,
and quantization effects.
EE 142 Pattern Recognition and Analysis of
Sensor Data 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion,
1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE 114 or STAT 155
or consent of the instructor. Introduction to
pattern recognition for multi-dimensional, multimodal sensor data such as images, videos,
and smart grids. Classification and decision
functions, feature extraction, regression, and
neural networks. Clustering and dimensionality
reduction for unsupervised learning. Dynamic
models and tracking. Applications of pattern
recognition in computer vision, robotics, smart
grids, etc.
EE 144 Introduction to Robotics 4 Lecture,
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
EE 132 Covers basic robot components from
encoders to microprocessors. Kinematic and
dynamic analysis of manipulators. Adrdresses
open- and closed-loop control strategies, task
planning, contact and noncontact sensors,
robotic image understanding, and robotic
programming languages. Experiments and
projects include robot arm programming, robot
vision, and mobile robots. Cross-listed with ME
144.
EE 145 Robotic Planning and
Kinematics 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): ME 120 or equivalent;
or consent on instructor. Motion planning
and kinematics topics with an emphasis in
geometric reasoning, programming, and
matrix computations. Motion planning includes
configuration spaces, sensor-based planning,
decomposition and sampling methods, and
advanced planning algorithms. Kinematics
includes reference frames, rotations and
displacements, and kinematic motion models.
Cross-listed with ME 145.
EE 146 Computer Vision 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): senior
standing in Computer Science or Electrical
Engineering, or consent of instructor. Imaging
formation, early vision processing, boundary
detection, region growing, two-dimensional and
three-dimensional object representation and
recognition techniques. Experiments for each
topic are carried out.
EE 147 Graphics Processing Unit Computing
and Programming 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE 120B
or CS 120B. Introduces principles and
practices of programming graphics processing
units (GPUs) using the parallel programming
environment. Covers memory/threading
models, common data-parallel programming
patterns and libraries needed to develop highperformance parallel computing applications.
Examines computational thinking; a broader
range of parallel execution models; and parallel
programming principles. Cross-listed with CS
147.
EE 150 Digital Communications 4 Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
EE 114, EE 115. Topics include modulation,
probability and random variables, correlation
and power spectra, information theory, errors of
transmission, equalization and coding methods,
shift and phase keying, and a comparison of
digital communication systems.
EE 151 Introduction to Digital Control 4 Lecture,
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
EE 132, EE 141. Review of continuous-time
control systems; review of Z-transform and
properties; sampled-data systems; stability
analysis and criteria; frequency domain
analysis and design; transient and steady-state
response; state-space techniques; controllability
and observability; pole placement; observer
design; Lyapunov stability analysis. Laboratory
experiments complementary to these topics
include simulations and hardware design.
EE 152 Image Processing 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 110B or
EE 111 or consent of instructor. Digital image
acquisition, image enhancement and restoration,
image compression, computer implementation
and testing of image processing techniques.
Students gain hands-on experience of complete
image processing systems, including image
acquisition, processing, and display through
laboratory experiments.
EE 153 Electric Drives 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 123 with
a grade of “D-” or better, EE 116 with a grade of
“D-” or better. EE 153 online section: enrollment
in the Online-Master-in-Science in Engineering
program. Covers the study of electro-mechanical
energy conversion; magnetic circuits and
components; electric motors; and direct current,
induction, and reluctance motor drives. Also
addresses servomechanism analysis and design
of feedback controllers; energy efficiency; and
drive-by-wire, robotic, and industrial automation
systems.
EE 155 Power System Analysis 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE
001B, EE 116; or consent of instructor. EE
155 online section: enrollment in the Online
Master-in-Science in Engineering program.
Covers long-distance transmission of electric
power. Emphasizes admittance and impedance
modeling of components and systems; optimal
power flow calculations and applications;
symmetrical and asymmetrical fault calculations;
economic operation of large-scale generation
and transmission systems; and analysis of
transmission and distribution networks.
EE 162 Introduction to
Nanoelectronics 4 Lecture, 3 hours; term
paper, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 133 or
consent of instructor; familiarity with MATLAB
or equivalent and with basic matrix algebra is
recommended. Presents the basic concepts
of nanoelectronics with a focus on current flow
through nanostructured devices. Topics include
new paradigms of nanoelectronics, an atomistic
view of electrical resistance, Schroedinger’s
equation, Coulomb blockade, basis functions,
bandstructure, quantum capacitance, level
broadening, and coherent transport.
EE 165 Design For Reliability of Integrated
Circuits and Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 100A;
senior or graduate standing or consent of
instructor. Covers essentials of electrical
transient induced failures to integrated circuits
(IC) and systems. Addresses basics for different
failure and testing models including electrostatic
discharge (ESD). Discusses design-for-reliability
(DFR) techniques such as ESD protection
designs at IC, module, and system levels.
Enhances learning with computer aided design
(CAD) laboratories.
EE 168 Introduction to Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Design 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): CS 120A/EE
120A or consent of instructor. Studies integrated
circuit fabrication, device characterization, and
circuit simulation. Introduces basic device
physics and physical design rules, MOS
logic design, and timing and clock schemes.
Covers layout generation, subsystem designs,
and circuits for alternative logic styles. Also
covers design and simulation using hardware
description language and CAD tools. Crosslisted with CS 168.
EE 175A Senior Design Project 4
Lecture, 1 hour; laboratory, 3 hours; practicum,
6 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE 120B or CS 120B;
restricted to class level standing of senior;
restricted to major(s) Electrical Engineering,
Electrical Engineering BS + MS; or consent
of instructor. Proposal of design of electrical
engineering devices or systems under the
direction of the instructor. Develops technical
specification; considers design constraints
and industry standards; emphasizes ethical
responsibilities; and promotes staying current
on technology and its socioeconomic and
environmental impact. Graded In Progress (IP)
until EE 175A and EE 175B are completed, at
which time, a final letter grade is assigned.
EE 175B Senior Design Project 4 Lecture, 1
hour; laboratory, 3 hours; practicum, 6 hours.
Prerequisite(s): EE 175A; senior standing
in Electrical Engineering. Builds, tests, and
redesigns electrical engineering devices or
systems. Develops and carries out test plan
according to design specification. Presents a
demo of the design. Completes project testing
and technical documentation. Presents a demo
of the design. Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC)
grading is not available.
EE 190 Special Studies 1 to 5 Individual Study, 3
to 15 hours. Prerequisite(s): consent of instructor
and department chair. Individual study to meet
special curricular needs. Course is repeatable to
a maximum of 9 units.
296 |
EE 191 (E-Z) Seminar in Electrical
Engineering 1 to 4 Seminar, 2 hours.
Prerequisite(s): EE 001B; restricted to class level
standing of junior, or senior. Consideration of
current topics in electrical engineering. Offered in
summer only. Offered in Summer only.
EE 191E Electric Vehicles 1 Seminar, 2
hours. Prerequisite(s): upper-division standing
or consent of instructor; EE 001B. Covers
principles of electric vehicle design. The
predominant focus is on the principles of electric
machine operation: electromechanical energy
conversion, rotating machines, direct current
(DC) machines, generators, alternate current
(AC) machines, and dynamics and control of
electric machines. Additional topics include
battery technology and vehicle dynamics.
Offered in summer only.
EE 194 Independent Reading 1 to 2 Extra
Reading, 3 to 6 hours. Prerequisite(s): upper
division standing or consent of instructor.
Independent reading in material not covered
in course work. Normally taken in senior year.
course is repeatable to a maximum of 4 units.
EE 197 Research For Undergraduates 1 to
4 Research, 3 to 12 hours. Prerequisite(s):
consent of instructor and Electrical Engineering
undergraduate program advisor. Directed
research on a topic relevant to electrical
engineering. Requires a final written report.
Course is repeatable to a maximum of 8 units.
EE 198I Individual Internship in Electrical
Engineering 1 to 12 Internship, 2 to 24 hours;
written work, 1 to 12 hours. Prerequisite(s):
upper-division standing; at least 12 units
in Electrical Engineering. Provides the
undergraduate student with career experience
as an electrical engineer in an industry or a
research unit under the joint supervision of an
off-campus sponsor and a faculty member
in Electrical Engineering. Each individual
program must have the prior approval of both
supervisors. Requires a final report. Graded
Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC). Course is
repeatable to a maximum of 12 units