ME 002 Introduction to Mechanical
Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours, discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): MATH 005 or equivalent.
An introduction to the field of mechanical
engineering. Topics include the mechanical
engineering profession; machine components;
forces in structures and fluids; materials and
stresses; thermal and energy systems; machine
motion; and machine design.
ME 003 How Things Work: the Principles Behind
Technology 4 Lecture, 3 hours, discussion,
1 hour. Prerequisite(s): none. Introduces the
basic physical principles of engineering systems
from everyday life such as automobiles,
computers, and household appliances. Topics
include conservation laws and the physics and
chemistry of engineering systems. Does not
confer credit towards a degree in the Bourns
College of Engineering.
ME 004 Energy and the Environment 4 Lecture,
3 hours, discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
none. Covers energy conservation, energy
sources, market dynamics, and climate change.
Addresses cultural, political, and social trends
and their impact on the ecosystem. Discusses
renewable and nonrenewable energy sources.
Technical background not required. Does not
confer credit towards a degree in the Bourns
College of Engineering.
ME 005 The Science of Mythbusting 4 Lecture,
3 hours, discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
none. Introduces to the scientific method for
non-science majors. Explores the application of
scientific concepts to test the validity of myths
and events from news stories, movies, and
other popular media. Provides critical reasoning
skills necessary to interpret advertiser’s product
claims, critique information on the World Wide
Web, and understand new technologies.
ME 009 Engineering Graphics and
Design 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): none. Covers graphical
concepts and projective geometry relating
to spatial visualization and communication
in design. Includes technical sketching,
computer-aided design with solid modeling,
geometric dimensioning and tolerancing, and an
introduction to the engineering design process.
ME 010 Statics 4 Lecture, 3 hours, discussion,
1 hour. Prerequisite(s): MATH 009C, PHYS
040A or PHYS 040HA. Covers equilibrium of
coplanar force systems; analysis of frames and
trusses; noncoplanar force systems; friction; and
distributed loads.
ME 018A Introduction to Engineering
Computation 2 Lecture, 1 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): MATH 009A or equivalent.
An introduction to the use of MATLAB in
engineering computation. Covers scripts and 
| 412
functions, programming, input/output, two- and
three-dimensional graphics, and elementary
numerical analysis.
ME 018B Introduction to Computational
Modeling in Mechanical Engineering 4 Lecture,
3 hours, discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
MATH 009B with a grade of “ C-” or better;
ME 002 with a grade of “C-” or better; ME
018A. Introduces students to concepts
of computational modeling in mechanical
engineering. Topics include formulation of
models to solve problems involving vector
analysis, linear algebra, differential and integral
calculus. Explores analytical and numerical
solutions to problems in mechanical engineering.
Upper-Division Courses
ME 100A Thermodynamics 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): MATH
010A, ME 018B with a grade of C- or better,
PHYS 040B or PHYS 040HB. Introduces basic
concepts and applications of thermodynamics
relevant to mechanical engineering. Topics
include work and energy, the first law of
thermodynamics, properties of pure substances,
system and control volume analysis, the Carnot
cycle, heat and refrigeration cycles, the second
law of thermodynamics, entropy, and reversible
and irreversible processes. Credit is awarded for
only one of CHE 100 or ME 100A.
ME 100B Thermodynamics 4 Lecture, 3
hours, discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
ME 100A. Topics include the second law of
thermodynamics, entropy function, entropy
production, analysis of cycles, vapor power
systems, gas power systems, refrigeration
and heat pump systems, equations of state,
thermodynamic property relations, ideal gas
mixtures and psychrometrics, multicomponent
systems, combustion, and reacting mixtures.
ME 103 Dynamics 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): MATH 046,
ME 010 with a grade of “C-” or better, ME 018B
with a grade of C- or better. Topics include
vector representation of kinematics and kinetics
of particles; Newton’s laws of motion; forcemass-acceleration, work-energy, and impulsemomentum methods; kinetics of systems of
particles; and kinematics and kinetics of rigid
bodies.
ME 110 Mechanics of Materials 4 Lecture,
3 hours, discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s):
CS 009M or ME 018A; MATH 046, ME 010
with a grade of “C-” or better. Topics include
mechanics of deformable bodies subjected
to axial, torsional, shear, and bending loads;
combined stresses; and their applications to the
design of structures.
ME 113 Fluid Mechanics 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): MATH 046,
PHYS 040B or PHYS 040HB, ME 010 with a
grade of C- or better, ME 018B with a grade
of C- or better. Introduces principles of fluid
mechanics relevant to mechanical engineering.
Topics include shear stresses and viscosity, fluid
statics, pressure, forces on submerged surfaces,
Bernoulli and mechanical energy equations,
control volume approach, mass conservation,
momentum and energy equations, the differential
approach, turbulent flow in pipes, and lift and
drag. Credit is awarded for only one of CHE 114
or ME 113.
ME 114 Introduction to Materials Science and
Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion,
1 hour. Prerequisite(s): CHEM 001B, PHYS
040C or PHYS 040HC; upper-division standing.
Covers materials classification, atomic structure
and interatomic bonding, crystal structure
of metals, imperfections in solids, diffusion,
mechanical properties of engineering materials,
strengthening mechanisms, basic concepts of
fracture and fatigue, phase diagrams, ceramics,
polymers, and composites.
ME 116A Heat Transfer 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): MATH 046,
ME 113 (ME 113 may be taken concurrently).
Introduces the analysis of steady and transient
heat conduction, fin and heat generating
systems, two-dimensional conduction,
internal and external forced convection,
natural convection, radiation heat transfer,
heat exchangers, and mass transfer. Credit is
awarded for only one of CHE 116 or ME 116A.
ME 116B Heat Transfer 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 116A.
Covers analytical and numerical methods in heat
transfer and fluid mechanics. Topics include heat
conduction and convection, gaseous radiation,
boiling and condensation, general aspects
of phase change, mass transfer principles,
multimode heat transfer and the simulation of
thermal fields, and the heat transfer process.
ME 117 Combustion and Energy
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours, discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): ME 100A, ME 113, ME 116A.
Discusses premixed and diffusion flames; fuel-air
thermochemistry; combustion-driven engine
design and operation; engine cycle analysis;
fluid mechanics in engine components; pollutant
formation; and gas turbines.
ME 118 Mechanical Engineering Modeling and
Analysis 4 Lecture, 3 hours, discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 046, ME 018B with a
grade of C- or better. Introduces data analysis
and modeling used in engineering through
the software package MATLAB. Numerical
methods include descriptive and inferential
statistics, sampling and bootstrapping, fitting
linear and nonlinear models to observed data,
interpolation, numerical differentiation and
integration, and solution of systems of ordinary
differential equations. Final project involves the
development and evaluation of a model for an
engineering system. Credit is awarded for only
one of ENGR 118 or ME 118.
ME 120 Linear Systems and Controls 4 Lecture,
3 hours, discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): EE
001A, EE 01LA, ME 018B with a grade of C- or
better. Introduces the modeling and analysis of
dynamic systems, emphasizing the common
features of mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic,
thermal, electrical, and electromechanical
systems. Controls are introduced through state
equations, equilibrium, linearization, stability, and
time and frequency domain analysis.
ME 121 Feedback Control 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 118,
ME 120. Introduces students to the analysis
and design of feedback control systems using
classical control methods. Topics include control
system terminology, block diagrams, analysis
and design of control systems in the time
and frequency domains, closed-loop stability,
root locus, Bode plots, and an introduction to
analysis in state-space.
ME 122 Vibrations 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 103.
Covers free and forced vibration of discrete
systems with and without damping resonance;
matrix methods for multiple degree-of-freedom
systems; normal modes, coupling, and normal
coordinates; and use of energy methods.
ME 130 Kinematic and Dynamic Analysis of
Mechanisms 4 Lecture, 3 hours, discussion, 1
hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 009, ME 103. Explores
the kinematic analysis of planar mechanisms
including linkages, cams, and gear trains.
Introduces concepts of multibody dynamics.
ME 131 Design of Mechanisms 4 Lecture,
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
ME 130. Involves design of planar, spherical,
and spatial mechanisms using both exact and
approximate graphical and analytical techniques.
Requires a computer-aided design project.
ME 133 Introduction to Mechatronics 4 Lecture,
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
ME 120. Introduces hardware, software,
sensors, actuators, physical systems models,
and control theory in the context of control
system implementation. Covers data acquisition
(Labview), sensors, actuators, electric circuits
and components, semiconductor electronics,
logic circuits, signal processing using analog
operational amplifiers, programmable logic
controllers, and microcontroller programming
and interfacing. Uses MATLAB and Simulink.
ME 134 Microstructural Transformations in
Materials 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): ME 114 or consent of instructor.
An introductory study of the fundamentals
(thermodynamics and kinetics) controlling
microstructural transformations in materials
and their application to both liquid-solid and
solid-solid transformations. Focuses on the
important transformations that ultimately control
the microstructures and properties of crystalline
solids. Cross-listed with MSE 134.
ME 135 Transport Phenomena 4 Lecture, 3
hours, discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME
100A, ME 113, ME 116A. Introduces new
concepts of thermodynamics, fluid mechanics,
and heat transfer: sychrometry, combustion,
one-dimensional compressible flow, and
turbomachinery. Integrates the most important
concepts of transport of momentum, heat, and
mass.
ME 136 Environmental Impacts of Energy
Production and Conversion 4 Lecture, 3 hours,
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 100A,
ME 113, ME 116A. Covers thermodynamics,
heat transfer, and fluid mechanics as applied to
the examination of the environmental impacts
of energy production and conversion. Topics
include pollution associated with fossil fuel
combustion, environmental impacts of energy
use, turbulent transport of pollutants, and
principles used in the design of pollution control
equipment.
ME 137 Environmental Fluid
Mechanics 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion 1 
413 |
hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 100A, ME 113. Covers
the application of fluid mechanics to flows in
the atmosphere and oceans. Topics include
hydrostatic balance, Coriolis effects, geostrophic
balance, boundary layers, turbulence, tracer and
heat transport.
ME 138 Transport Phenomena in Living
Systems 4 Lecture, 3 hours; discussion 1 hour.
Prerequisite(s): BIEN 105 or ME 113, MATH 046,
PHYS 040B or PHYS 040HB. An introduction
to the application of the basic conservation laws
of mechanics (mass, linear momentum, and
energy) to the modeling of complex biological
systems. Emphasizes how these concepts can
explain and predict life processes.
ME 140 Ship Theory 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 103,
ME 113. Covers ship hull form, static and
dynamic stability, ship response to waves,
grounding and flooding, numerical integration
of complex three-dimensional curved shapes
and mathematical modeling of curved surfaces.
Explores engineering approximations necessary
for applications of fundamental principles to
complex engineering systems such as ships.
ME 144 Introduction to Robotics 4 Lecture,
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s):
EE 132. Covers basic robot components from
encoders to microprocessors. Kinematic and
dynamic analysis of manipulators. Adrdresses
open- and closed-loop control strategies, task
planning, contact and noncontact sensors,
robotic image understanding, and robotic
programming languages. Experiments and
projects include robot arm programming, robot
vision, and mobile robots. Cross-listed with EE
144.
ME 145 Robotic Planning and
Kinematics 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): ME 120 or equivalent;
or consent on instructor. Motion planning
and kinematics topics with an emphasis in
geometric reasoning, programming, and
matrix computations. Motion planning includes
configuration spaces, sensor-based planning,
decomposition and sampling methods, and
advanced planning algorithms. Kinematics
includes reference frames, rotations and
displacements, and kinematic motion models.
Cross-listed with EE 145.
ME 153 Finite Element Methods 4 Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME
118. Covers weak form formulation, the Galerkin
method and its computational implementation,
mesh generation, data visualization, as well as
programming finite element codes for practical
engineering applications.
ME 156 Mechanical Behavior of
Materials 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours. Prerequisite(s): senior standing; ME 110;
ME 114. Introduces the theory and experimental
techniques for testing the mechanical behavior
of materials and structures. Covers the
fundamental mechanisms of deformation and
failure of metals, ceramics, polymers, composite
materials, and electronic materials as well as
structural design and materials selection.
ME 170A Experimental Techniques 4 Lecture,
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): EE
001A, EE 01LA, ME 018B. Covers the principles
and practice of measurement and control, and
the design and implementation of experiments.
Topics include dimensional analysis, error
analysis, signal-to-noise problems, filtering, data
acquisition and data reduction, and statistical
analysis. Includes experiments on the use of
electronic devices and sensors, and practice in
technical report writing.
ME 170B Experimental Techniques 4 Laboratory,
6 hours; discussion, 2 hours. Prerequisite(s):
ME 103, ME 110, ME 113, ME 116A, ME 170A.
Analysis and verification of engineering theory
using laboratory measurements in advanced,
project-oriented experiments involving fluid
flow, heat transfer, structural dynamics,
thermodynamic systems, and electromechanical
systems.
ME 174 Machine Design 4 Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME 009, ME
103 (can be taken concurrently), ME 110, ME
114. An introduction to the fundamentals of
strength-based design. Topics include deflection
and stiffness, static failure, and fatigue failure.
ME 175A Professional Topics in
Engineering 2 Lecture, 2 hours. Prerequisite(s):
senior standing in Mechanical Engineering
major; ME 009. Topics include technical
communication, team work, project
management, engineering economics,
professional ethics, and computer-aided design.
Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC) grading is not
available.
ME 175B Mechanical Engineering
Design 3 Lecture, 2 hours; laboratory, 2 hours.
Prerequisite(s): senior standing in Mechanical
Engineering. ME 113, ME 116A, ME 170A, ME
174, ME 175A (may be taken concurrently).
Outlines the defining of a design problem and
the conception and detail of the design solution.
Explores design theory, design for safety,
reliability, manufacture, and assembly. Graded
In Progress (IP) until ME 175B and ME 175C are
completed, at which time a final, letter grade is
assigned.
ME 175C Mechanical Engineering
Design 3 Lecture, 1 hours; discussion, 1 hour;
laboratory, 3 hours. Prerequisite(s): senior
standing in Mechanical Engineering; ME 175B.
Students create, test, and evaluate a prototype
based on the project design generated in
ME 175B. Lecture topics include prototyping
techniques, design verification, and special
topics in design. Satisfactory (S) or No Credit
(NC) grading is not available.
ME 175D Technological
Entrepreneurship 4 Lecture, 2 hours; workshop,
2 hours. Prerequisite(s): senior standing in
Mechanicail Enigneering. Introduces concepts of
business and management required to convert a
technology into a viable business. Topics include
technological assessment, market analysis,
strategy, decision making, legal and intellectual
property issues in business, financial analysis,
business ethics and communication. Satisfactory
(S) or No Credit (NC) grading is not available
ME 176 Sustainable Product Design 4 Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 1 hour. Prerequisite(s): ME
103, ME 110, ME 113, ME 116A. Introduces
the principles of sustainable product design.
Topics include life cycle design; design for
reliability, maintainability, and recycling/reuse/
remanufacture; materials selection; and
manufacturing processes. Includes project
in which students analyze the environmental
impact of a product and redesign it to reduce
the impact. Credit is awarded for only one of ME
176 or ME 210.
ME 180 Optics and Lasers in
Engineering 4 Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory,
3 hours. Prerequisite(s): senior standing;
ME 010, ME 110, ME 170A. Focuses
on principles of optics and lasers, wave
equations, interferometry, diffraction, lasermaterial interactions. Applications in analytical
characterization including confocal microscopy,
Raman spectroscopy, mechanical deformation
analysis, scanning probe microscopy, ultravioletvisible spectrophotometry, photoluminescence,
optical detectors, and lasers in materials
processing.
ME 190 Special Studies 1 to 5 Individual
Study, 3 to 15 hours. Prerequisite(s): consent
of instructor, department chair, and Mechanical
Engineering Undergraduate Program Committee
chair. Individual study to meet special curricular
needs. Requires a final written report. Course is
repeatable to a maximum of 9 units.
ME 197 Research For Undergraduates 1 to
4 Research, 3 to 12 hours. Prerequisite(s):
consent of instructor and Mechanical
Engineering Undergraduate Program Committee
chair. Directed research in a particular subject
relevant to mechanical engineering. Requires
a final written technical report. Course is
repeatable to a maximum of 8 units
ME 198 R’course: Variable Topics 1 Activity,
3 hours. Prerequisite(s): permission needed
from department; sophomore standing or
better. An opportunity for UCR undergraduate
students to develop leadership skills, innovate
the undergraduate curriculum, and promote
democratic, experiential education. Original
course topics are variable and unique from other
departmental course offerings, designed to
highlight the student facilitators’ expertise while
working closely with a faculty mentor. Graded
Satisfactory (S) or No Credit (NC).Course is
repeatable as topics change to a maximum of
8 units.